{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\nouicompat\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Calibri;}{\f1\fnil Calibri;}{\f2\fnil\fcharset1 Cambria Math;}{\f3\fnil\fcharset0 Cambria Math;}{\f4\fnil Cambria Math;}{\f5\fnil\fcharset1 Segoe UI Symbol;}{\f6\fnil Segoe UI Symbol;}{\f7\fnil\fcharset2 Symbol;}}
{\colortbl ;\red0\green0\blue255;}
{\*\generator Riched20 10.0.19041}{\*\mmathPr\mmathFont2\mwrapIndent1440 }\viewkind4\uc1 
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qc\b\f0\fs28\lang9 Module 12: Installation, Storage, and Compute\par
with Windows Server\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj 1. What two options are provided in the type of installation window during Windows\par
Server 2016 installation?\par
\b0 Ans. \b Server Core Installation\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj 1. A minimal installation with no GUI (Graphical User Interface).\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}2. Provides only a command-line interface and PowerShell.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}3. Uses fewer resources and has a smaller attack surface, making it more secure.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Server with Desktop Experience (Full Installation)\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj 1. the full GUI (Graphical User Interface) similar to Windows 10.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}2. Easier for administrators who prefer graphical tools.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}3. Consumes more system resources compared to Server Core.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 2. Write the step How to configure server step by step?\par
\b0 Ans. Windows Server 2016 \f1\endash  Initial Configuration Steps\par
\b Sign in & rename the server\b0\par
\f0\lang1033 1. \f1\lang9 GUI: Server Manager \f2\u8594?\f1  \f0 Local Server \f2\u8594?\f1  \f0 Computer name \f2\u8594?\f1  \f0 Change\'85 \f2\u8594?\f1  \f0 set name \f2\u8594?\f1  \f0 Restart.\par
\b PowerShell:\b0\par
1. Rename-Computer -NewName "SRV-APP01" -Restart\par
2. Set a static IP & DNS\par
3. GUI: Control Panel \f2\u8594?\f1  \f0 Network and Sharing Center \f2\u8594?\f1  \f0 Change adapter settings \f2\u8594?\f1  \f0 Ethernet \f2\u8594?\f1  \f0 Properties \f2\u8594?\f1  \f0 IPv4.\par
\b PowerShell:\b0\par
1. New-NetIPAddress -InterfaceAlias "Ethernet" -IPAddress 192.168.1.10 -PrefixLength 24 -DefaultGateway 192.168.1.1\par
2. Set-DnsClientServerAddress -InterfaceAlias "Ethernet" -ServerAddresses 192.168.1.10,8.8.8.8\par
3. Set time zone & NTP\par
4. GUI: Date & time settings \f2\u8594?\f1  \f0 Time zone.\par
\b PowerShell:\b0\par
1. tzutil /s "India Standard Time"\par
2.w32tm/config/syncfromflags:manual /manualpeerlist:"time.windows.com" /updatew32tm /resync\par
3. Enable Remote Desktop (if needed)\par
4. GUI: Server Manager \f2\u8594?\f1  \f0 Local Server \f2\u8594?\f1  \f0 Remote Desktop \f2\u8594?\f1  \f0 Enable.\par
\b PowerShell:\b0\par
1. Set-ItemProperty 'HKLM:\\System\\CurrentControlSet\\Control\\Terminal Server' -Name "fDenyTSConnections" -Value 0\par
2. Enable-NetFirewallRule -DisplayGroup "Remote Desktop"\par
3. Windows Update & activation\par
4. GUI: Settings \f2\u8594?\f1  \f0 Update & security \f2\u8594?\f1  \f0 Check for updates, then System \f2\u8594?\f1  \f0 About \f2\u8594?\f1  \f0 Activate.\par
5. Core servers: run sconfig and choose the Update/Activation options.\par
6. Configure Windows Firewall (profiles/rules)\par
7. GUI: Windows Firewall with Advanced Security.\par
\b PowerShell:\b0\par
1. Get-NetFirewallProfile | Set-NetFirewallProfile -Enabled True\par
2. Install required roles & features\par
3. GUI: Server Manager \f2\u8594?\f1  \f0 Add roles and features.\par
\b PowerShell (examples):\b0\par
1.Install-WindowsFeature AD-Domain-Services, DNS -IncludeManagementTools\par
2. Install-WindowsFeature DHCP -IncludeManagementTools\par
3. Install-WindowsFeature FS-FileServer\par
4. Install-WindowsFeature Web-Server -IncludeManagementTools\par
5. Install-WindowsFeature Windows-Server-Backup\par
6. If this server will be a Domain Controller (AD DS)\par
7. Promote to Domain Controller\par
8. GUI: In Server Manager, after AD DS install \f2\u8594?\f1  \f0 Promote this server to a domain controller \f2\u8594?\f1  \f0 choose:\par
\b PowerShell (new forest example):\par
\b0 1.Install-ADDSForest -DomainName "corp.local" -SafeModeAdministratorPassword (Read-Host -AsSecureString)\par
2. DNS basics\par
3. In DNS Manager, set Forwarders to your ISP/public DNS (e.g., 8.8.8.8).\par
\b PowerShell:\b0\par
1. Add-DnsServerForwarder -IPAddress 8.8.8.8\par
2. Create users & groups\par
3. GUI: Active Directory Users and Computers (dsa.msc).\par
\b PowerShell:\b0\par
1.New-ADUser -Name "Harshita Kumawat" -SamAccountName hkumawat -AccountPassword (Read-Host -AsSecureString) -Enabled $true\par
2.New-ADGroup "App-Admins" -GroupScope Global -Path "CN=Users,DC=corp,DC=local"\par
3. Add-ADGroupMember "App-Admins" hkumawat\par
4. Join member servers/PCs to the domain\par
5. GUI: System Properties \f2\u8594?\f1  \f0 Change \f2\u8594?\f1  \f0 Domain: corp.local \f2\u8594?\f1  \f0 enter domain creds \f2\u8594?\f1  \f0 Restart.\par
\b PowerShell (on the member computer):\par
\b0 1. Add-Computer -DomainName corp.local -Restart\par
2. If this server will be DHCP\par
3. Authorize DHCP & create scope\par
4. GUI: DHCP Manager \f2\u8594?\f1  \f0 Right-click server \f2\u8594?\f1  \f0 Authorize; then IPv4 \f2\u8594?\f1  \f0 New Scope.\par
\b PowerShell:\b0\par
1.Add-DhcpServerInDC -DnsName "srv-dc01.corp.local" -IpAddress 192.168.1.10\par
2. Add-DhcpServerv4Scope -Name "LAN" -StartRange 192.168.1.100 -EndRange 192.168.1.200 -SubnetMask 255.255.255.0\par
3. Set-DhcpServerv4OptionValue -OptionId 3 -Value 192.168.1.1\par
4. Set-DhcpServerv4OptionValue -OptionId 6 -Value 192.168.1.10\par
5. Set-DhcpServerv4OptionValue -OptionId 15 -Value "corp.local"\par
6. If this server will be a File Server\par
7. Create data volume & NTFS permissions\par
8. GUI: Disk Management \f2\u8594?\f1  \f0 initialize/format \f2\u8594?\f1  \f0 assign drive letter.\par
9. Create folders (e.g., D:\\Shares\\Dept). Set NTFS: Properties \f2\u8594?\f1  \f0 Security (use groups, not users).\par
10. Create SMB shares\par
11. GUI: Server Manager \f2\u8594?\f1  \f0 File and Storage Services \f2\u8594?\f1  \f0 Shares \f2\u8594?\f1  \f0 New Share.\par
\b PowerShell:\b0\par
1. New-SmbShare -Name "Dept" -Path "D:\\Shares\\Dept" -FullAccess "DOMAIN\\App-Admins" -ChangeAccess "DOMAIN\\Dept-Users"\par
2. If this server will be IIS (Web Server)\par
3. Add site & bindings\par
4. GUI: IIS Manager \f2\u8594?\f1  \f0 Sites \f2\u8594?\f1  \f0 Add Website\'85 (set path, port 80/443, host name).\par
5. Import/assign SSL cert under Server Certificates and in Bindings for HTTPS.\par
6. Baseline hardening & housekeeping\par
7. Group Policy: Create baseline GPOs (password/lockout, firewall, audit, WSUS, RDP restrictions) via gpmc.msc.\par
8. Backups: Install Windows Server Backup, schedule daily backup incl. System State.\par
\b PowerShell:\b0\par
1. wbadmin enable backup -addtarget:{{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "\\\\\\\\NAS\\\\Backups\\\\SRV-APP01"}}{\fldrslt{\\\\NAS\\Backups\\SRV-APP01\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs28  -include:C:,SystemState -schedule:21:00 -quiet\par
2. Monitoring & logs: Configure Event Forwarding, set performance counters/alerts.\par
3. Anti-malware: Deploy Defender or your enterprise AV.\par
4. Documentation: Record hostname, IPs, roles, admin accounts, backup plan, and change log.\par
\b 3\f3 . \f0 What\f3  \f0 are\f3  \f0 the\f3  \f0 Pre\f3  \f0 installation\f3  \f0 tasks\f3 ?\b0\par
Ans. Check hardware requirements\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj 1. CPU: 1.4 GHz (64-bit) or higher\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}2. RAM: Minimum 512 MB (2 GB recommended for GUI)\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}3. Disk: At least 32 GB free space\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Decide server edition & installation type\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj 1. Standard / Datacenter\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}2. Server Core / Server with Desktop Experience\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Check compatibility\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj 1. Ensure hardware drivers are supported\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}2. Verify applications/software support Windows Server 2016\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Plan server role\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj 1. Example: Domain Controller, DNS, DHCP, File Server, Web Server, etc.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Plan network settings\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj 2. Decide IP address, subnet mask, gateway, and DNS server\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Backup important data\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj 3. Backup existing data from the machine (if reused)\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Check firmware/BIOS settings\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj 1. Enable virtualization (if Hyper-V required)\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}2. Set correct boot order (DVD/USB/ISO first)\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Collect installation media & product key\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b0 1. Windows Server 2016 ISO/DVD/USB\b\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}\b0 2. License key for activation\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Ensure power & connectivity\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj 1. Reliable power (UPS recommended)\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}2. Stable network connection if joining domain or downloading updates\f0\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b\f3 4. What are the Post installation tasks?\par
\b0 Ans.\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj 1. Install latest updates \f2\u8594? Run Windows Update.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}\f3\lang1033 2. \f4 Set strong Administrator password.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}\f3 3. \f4 Rename the server (from default name).\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}\f3 4. \f4 Assign static IP address & DNS settings.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}\f3 5. \f4 Activate Windows with product key.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}\f3 6. \f4 Configure date, time & time zone.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}\f3 7. \f4 Enable Remote Desktop (if needed).\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}\f3 8. \f4 Configure Windows Firewall settings.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}\f3 9. \f4 Install required server roles/features (e.g., AD DS, DHCP, IIS).\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}\f3 10. \f4 Promote to Domain Controller (if AD planned).\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}\f3 11. \f4 Set up user accounts & groups.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}\f3 12. \f4 Configure storage, shares, and NTFS permissions.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}\f3 13. \f4 Set up backup & recovery plan.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}\f3 14. \f4 Apply security policies & Group Policy settings.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}\f3 15. \f4 Document server configuration for future reference.\f0\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 5\f3 . \f0 What\f3  \f0 is\f3  \f0 the\f3  \f0 standard\f3  \f0 upgrade\f3  \f0 path\f3  \f0 for\f3  \f0 Windows\f3  \f0 Server\f3 ?\b0\f0\par
Ans.The\f3  \f0 standard\f3  \f0 upgrade\f3  \f0 path\f3  \f0 for\f3  \f0 Windows\f3  \f0 Server\f3  \f0 means\f3  \f0 which\f3  \f0 versions\f3  \f0 you\f3  \f0 can\f3  \f0 upgrade\f3  \f0 in\f3 -\f0 place\f3  (\f0 keeping\f3  \f0 data\f3 /\f0 apps\f3 ) \f0 to\f3  \f0 a\f3  \f0 newer\f3  \f0 version\f3 .\f0\par
\b For\f3  \f0 Windows\f3  \f0 Server\f3  \f0 2016\f3 , \f0 the\f3  \f0 upgrade\f3  \f0 paths\f3  \f0 are\f3 :\f0\par
Supported\f3  \f0 In\f3 -\f0 Place\f3  \f0 Upgrades\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b0 1. Windows\f3  \f0 Server\f3  \f0 2012\f3  \f2\u8594? Windows Server 2016\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}\f3\lang1033 2. \f4 Windows Server 2012 R2 \f2\u8594? Windows Server 2016\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b\f0 Not\f3  \f0 Supported\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj 1. Direct\f3  \f0 upgrade\f3  \f0 from\f3  \f0 Windows\f3  \f0 Server\f3  \f0 2008\f3  / \f0 2008\f3  \f0 R2\f3  \f2\u8594? 2016 (you must first upgrade to 2012/2012 R2, then to 2016).\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}\f3\lang1033 2. \f4 Upgrade from 32-bit to 64-bit \f2\u8594? not supported.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}\f3\lang1033 3. \f4 Upgrade from one edition to a lower edition (like Datacenter \f2\u8594? Standard) \u8594? not supported.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\f0 Edition\f3  \f0 Upgrades\f3  (\f0 same\f3  \f0 version\f3 )\f0\par
Within\f3  \f0 Windows\f3  \f0 Server\f3  \f0 2016\f3  \f0 itself\f3 , \f0 you\f3  \f0 can\f3  \f0 upgrade\f3  \f0 edition\f3  \f0 by\f3  \f0 using\f3 :\par
\b powershell:\f0\par
\b0 1. DISM\f3  /\f0 online\f3  /\f0 Set\f3 -\f0 Edition\f3 :\f0 ServerDatacenter\f3  /\f0 ProductKey\f3 :\f0 XXXXX\f3 -\f0 XXXXX\f3 -\f0 XXXXX\f3 -\f0 XXXXX\f3 -\f0 XXXXX\f3  /\f0 AcceptEula\par
\f3 (\f0 for\f3  \f0 Standard\f3  \f2\u8594? Datacenter)\par
\b 6. What is the Physical structure of AD?\par
\b0\f3\lang1033 Ans.Physical Structure of AD:\par
\b Domain Controllers (DCs)\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj 1. Servers that store a copy of the Active Directory database.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}2. Handle authentication, replication, and directory services.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Sites\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj 1. Represents the physical location (like offices, branches, data centers).\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}2. A site is defined by one or more IP subnets.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}3. Helps control replication traffic between DCs in different locations.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Subnets\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj 1. Used to map IP addresses to AD sites.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}2. Ensures clients authenticate with the nearest DC to improve performance.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Site Links\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b0 1. Define the network connection between two or more sites.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}2. Control replication schedule and cost (bandwidth usage).\b\f0\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\f3 7. What is the Logical components of Active Directory?\par
\b0 Ans. Logical Components of AD:\par
\b Forest \b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj 1. The topmost logical container.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}2. A collection of one or more domain trees that share a common schema, configuration, and global catalog.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Domain\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj 1. A logical group of objects (users, computers, groups) sharing the same namespace (e.g., corp.local).\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}2. Acts as a security boundary for policies and authentication.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Tree\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj 1. A collection of one or more domains in a hierarchical structure.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}2. Domains in a tree share a contiguous namespace (e.g., corp.local, sales.corp.local).\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Organizational Units (OUs)\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b0 1. Containers within a domain used to group objects (users, computers, groups).\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}2. Allow delegation of administration and application of Group Policies.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Objects\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj 1. The basic elements stored in AD (users, computers, groups, printers, etc.).\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}2. Each object has attributes (like username, password, email).\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Global Catalog \b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj 1. A distributed data repository that contains a searchable index of all objects in a forest.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}2. Helps users find resources across domains\b\f0\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\lang9 8. What is the Full form Of LDAP?\par
\b0 Ans.Lightweight Directory Access Protocol.\par
\b 9. What is the location of the AD database?\par
\b0 Ans.Default location:\par
1. Default location: C:\\Windows\\NTDS\\NTDS.dit \par
\b 10. What is child DC?\par
\b0 Ans. \b Key Points:\b0\par
\b Child Domain\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj 1. A domain that is subordinate to a parent domain.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}2. Shares part of the namespace of the parent (e.g., Parent: corp.local, Child: sales.corp.local).\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Child DC\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj 1. A domain controller installed in the child domain.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}2. Handles authentication, replication, and directory services for that child domain.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}3. Replicates data with the parent domain controllers and other DCs in the child domain.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Purpose\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj 1. Helps organize large organizations with multiple departments or locations.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}2. Provides local authentication and reduces cross-network traffic to parent DCs.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 11. Explain the term forest in AD?\par
\b0 Ans. In Active Directory (AD), a forest is the topmost logical container that holds one or more domain trees which share a common schema, configuration, and global catalog.\par
\b Key Points:\b0\par
1. Highest-level structure in AD hierarchy.\par
\b 2.Domains in a forest can have different namespaces but share:\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b0 1. Schema\b  \b0 (defines object types & attributes)\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}2. Configuration (replication and topology info)\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}3. Global Catalog (for searching objects across domains)\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 3.Trust relationships:\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b0 1. Domains within a forest automatically trust each other (two-way transitive trust).\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 4.Purpose:\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj 2. Enables centralized management and resource sharing across multiple domains\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 12. What is Active Directory? Check all that apply?\par
\f5\u9679?\f1  \f0 An open-source directory server\par
\f5\u9679?\f1  \f0 A Windows-only implementation of a directory server\par
\f5\u9679?\f1  \f0 Microsoft's implementation of a directory server\par
\f5\u9679?\f1  \f0 An LDAP-compatible directory server\par
\b0 Ans.The correct answers are:\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj 1. A Windows-only implementation of a directory server.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}2. Microsoft's implementation of a directory server.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}3. An LDAP-compatible directory server.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 13. When you create an Active Directory domain, what's the name of the default user?\par
account?\par
\f5\u9679?\f1  \f0 Superuser\par
\f5\u9679?\f1  \f0 Root\par
\f5\u9679?\f1  \f0 Username\par
\f5\u9679?\f1  \f0 Administrator\par
\b0 Ans.The correct answer is:\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj 1. Administrator\b\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj 14. AD domain provides which of the following advantages? Check all that apply?\par
\f5\u9679?\f1  \f0 Centralized authentication\par
\f5\u9679?\f1  \f0 More detailed logging\par
\f5\u9679?\f1  \f0 Centralized management with GPOs\par
\f5\u9679?\f1  \f0 Better performance\par
\b0 Ans.The correct answers are:\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj 1. Centralized authentication.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}2. More detailed logging.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}3. Centralized management with GPOs.\b\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj 15. What are the minimum hardware requirements for installing Windows Server 2016?\par
\b0 Ans.\f6\par
\b\f0 Processor (CPU):\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj 1. 1.4 GHz 64-bit processor\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}2. Must support x64 architecture\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}3. Must support NX (No-Execute Bit), DEP, CMPXCHG16b, LAHF/SAHF, and PrefetchW\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}4. Must support Second Level Address Translation (SLAT) (for Hyper-V)\b\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj RAM (Memory):\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b0 1. Minimum: 512 MB (with Desktop Experience, at least 2 GB)\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}2. For installation via network, at least 800 MB\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Storage (Disk Space):\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b0 1. Minimum: 32 GB\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}2. If the system has more than 16 GB RAM, more disk space is needed for paging, hibernation, and dump files\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Network:\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj 1. Ethernet adapter with at least 1 gigabit per second throughput\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}2. Must be PCI Express compliant\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Other requirements:\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj 1. DVD drive (if installing from DVD media)\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}2. UEFI 2.3.1c-based system and firmware supporting Secure Boot\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}3. Super VGA (1024 \'d7 768) or higher resolution monitor\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}4. Keyboard and mouse\b\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj 16. Explain the different editions of Windows Server 2016 and their features?\par
\b0 Ans.\b 1. Windows Server 2016 Datacenter Edition\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b0 1. Best for: Large enterprises and data centers with highly virtualized & cloud environments.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Key Features:\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj 1. Unlimited virtualization rights (run unlimited VMs with Hyper-V)\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}2. Storage Spaces Direct (high-performance, fault-tolerant storage clusters)\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}3. Storage Replica (block-level replication for disaster recovery)\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}4. Shielded Virtual Machines (protect VMs from unauthorized access)\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}5. Software-defined networking\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}6. Advanced security features (Just Enough Administration, Device Guard, etc.)\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}7. Full support for containers (Windows Server & Hyper-V containers)\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 2. Windows Server 2016 Standard Edition\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj 1. Best for: Small to medium businesses or environments with low to\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}2. moderate virtualization needs.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Key Features:\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj 1. Includes all core Windows Server 2016 features (Active Directory, DNS, DHCP, etc.)\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}2. Virtualization rights limited \f2\u8594?\f1  \f0 2 VMs per license (plus 1 Hyper-V host)\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}3. Supports Windows Server containers\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}4. No Storage Spaces Direct or Shielded VM features (Datacenter-only)\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}5. Lower cost than Datacenter\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 3. Windows Server 2016 Essentials Edition\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj 1. Best for: Small businesses (up to 25 users and 50 devices).\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Key Features:\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj 1. Simplified management through a dashboard\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}2. No virtualization rights (Hyper-V role not supported)\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}3. Pre-configured with features useful for small orgs (file/print sharing, remote access)\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}4. Lower hardware requirements than other editions\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}5. Easier setup but fewer advanced features\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 4. Windows Server 2016 MultiPoint Premium Server (less common)\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj 1. Best for: Educational environments (classrooms, labs).\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Key Features:\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj 1. Allows multiple users to connect to one computer using multiple stations\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}2. Centralized management for multi-user classrooms/labs\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}3. Designed for cost-effective deployment in education\lang9\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 17. Walk through the steps of installing Windows Server 2016 using GUI mode\b0\lang1033 ?\par
Ans. Steps to Install Windows Server 2016 (GUI Mode)\par
\b Step 1: Boot from Installation Media\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj a. Insert the Windows Server 2016 DVD/USB or mount the ISO (if on a VM).\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}b. Boot the system and press any key when prompted.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}c. Windows Setup will load files.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Step 2: Select Language and Preferences\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj a. On the Windows Setup screen, choose:\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}b. Language to install\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}c. Time and currency format\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}d. Keyboard or input method\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}e. Click Next \f2\u8594?\f1  \f0 Click Install Now.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Step 3: Enter Product Key\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj a. Enter your product key if available.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}b. If not, click I don\f4\rquote\f0 t have a product key to continue with evaluation mode.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Step 4: Select Edition and Installation Type\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b0 a. Choose the edition you want to install:\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}b.Windows Server 2016 Standard (Desktop Experience)\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}c. Windows Server 2016 Datacenter (Desktop Experience)\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}d. Make sure to select Desktop Experience if you want GUI mode (otherwise, it installs Server Core without GUI).\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}e. Click Next.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Step 5: Accept License Terms\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj a. Check I accept the license terms.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}b. Click Next\i\lang1033 .\i0\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Step 6: Choose Installation Type\b0\par
\b  Select:\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj a. Custom: Install Windows only (advanced) \f2\u8594?\f1  \f0 for fresh installation (Upgrade is only for existing installations, usually skipped in fresh installs)\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Step 7: Select Disk Partition\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b0 a. Sele\lang1033 ct the disk/partition where you want to install Windows Server 2016.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}b. Format or delete/create partitions if needed.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}c. Click Next.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Step 8: Installation Process\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b0 a. Windows will copy files, install features, and configure settings.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}b. System will reboot automatically several times.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Step 9: Initial Configuration.\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj a. After reboot, set a strong Administrator password.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}b. Press Finish or OK.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Step 10: First Login\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj a. Press Ctrl + Alt + Delete to sign in.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}b. Enter Administrator password.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}c. Windows Server 2016 Desktop (GUI mode) will load.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Step 11: Post-Installation Configuration\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b0 a. Configure server settings using Server Manager:\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}b. Set computer name\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}c. Configure IP address\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}e. Enable Remote Desktop\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}f. Install roles/features (like Active Directory, DNS, DHCP, etc.)\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 18. Describe the steps for installing Windows Server 2016 in Server Core mode?\par
Ans.Steps to Install Windows Server 2016 (Server Core Mode)\par
Step 1: Boot from Installation Media\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b0 a. Insert the Windows Server 2016 DVD/USB or mount the ISO (if installing on a VM).\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}b. Boot the system \f2\u8594?\f1  \f0 Press any key to boot from the media.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}\lang1033 c. Setup will load files.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Step 2: Choose Language and Preferences\b0\f3\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\f4 Select:\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}\f0 a. Language to install\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}b. Time and currency format\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}c. Keyboard/input method\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}d. Click Next \f2\u8594?\f1  \f0 then click Install Now.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Step 3: Enter Product Key\b0\f4\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\f0\lang1033 a. Enter the product key, or click I don\f4\rquote\f0 t have a product key to continue with evaluation mode.\f4\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b\f0 Step 4: Select Edition and Installation Type\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj a. Choose the edition without Desktop Experience (for Server Core):\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}b. Windows Server 2016 Standard (Server Core Installation)\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}c. Windows Server 2016 Datacenter (Server Core Installation\f4 )\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}\f0 d. Make sure you select Server Core, otherwise you\f1\rquote\f0 ll get the GUI (Desktop Experience).\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}e. Click Next.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Step 5: Accept License Terms\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj a. Check I accept the license terms.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}b. Click Next.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Step 6: Choose Installation Type\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Select:\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}\b0 a. Custom: Install Windows only (advanced) for fresh installation.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Step 7: Select Partition/Disk\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj a. Choose the target hard drive or partition.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}b. Format or create partitions as needed.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}c. Click Next.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Step 8: Installation Process\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b0 a. Setup copies files and installs Windows.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}b. The system will reboot automatically several times.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Step 9: Initial Setup (Command Line Only)\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b0  After reboot, you\f1\rquote\f0 ll see a black command-line screen (no GUI).\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Set a strong Administrator password when prompted.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Login with Ctrl + Alt + Delete \f2\u8594?\f1  \f0 Administrator credentials.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Step 10: Basic Configuration using Commands\b0\f4\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\f3\lang1033 Now configure the server using command-line tools:\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Rename Computer:\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj hostname\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Rename-Computer -NewName "ServerCore01"\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Set Static IP:\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}New-NetIPAddress -InterfaceIndex 12 -IPAddress 192.168.1.10 -PrefixLength 24 -DefaultGateway 192.168.1.1\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Set DNS Server: \f4 Set-DnsClientServerAddress -InterfaceIndex 12 -Server\f3  \f4 Addresses\f3  \f4 192.168.1.2\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Enable Remote Desktop (optional):\f3  \f4 cscript %windir%\\system32\\scregedit.wsf /ar 0\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Use sconfig (Server Configuration tool) for easier configuration:\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}sconfig\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}This lets you configure hostname, domain join, updates, remote management, etc.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b\f0 19. How do you configure network settings during Windows Server 2016 installation?\b0\par
Ans. \b 1. During Installation\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b0 During\f3  \f0 the\f3  \f0 setup\f3  \f0 process\f3  \f0 itself\f3 , \f0 Windows\f3  \f0 Server\f3  \f0 2016\f3  \f0 does\f3  \f0 not\f3  \f0 prompt\f3  \f0 you\f3  \f0 for\f3  \f0 detailed\f3  \f0 network\f3  \f0 settings\f3  (\f0 like\f3  \f0 IP\f3 , \f0 DNS\f3 , \f0 Gateway\f3 ).\f0\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}By\f3  \f0 default\f3 , \f0 the\f3  \f0 server\f3  \f0 installs\f3  \f0 with\f3  \f0 DHCP\f3  \f0 enabled\f3  (\f0 it\f3  \f0 will\f3  \f0 try\f3  \f0 to\f3  \f0 get\f3  \f0 an\f3  \f0 IP\f3  \f0 from\f3  \f0 a\f3  \f0 DHCP\f3  \f0 server\f3 ).\f0\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}If\f3  \f0 no\f3  \f0 DHCP\f3  \f0 server\f3  \f0 exists\f3 , \f0 it\f3  \f0 assigns\f3  \f0 an\f3  \f0 APIPA\f3  \f0 address\f3  (\f0 169\f3 .\f0 254\f3 .\f0 x\f3 .\f0 x\f3 ).\f0\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 2. After Installation \f4\endash\f1  \f0 In GUI Mode (Desktop Experience)\f4\par
\f0 Open Network Settings:\b0\f4\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Right-click the network icon in the taskbar \f2\u8594? Open Network and Sharing Center\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}\f4\lang1033 Or go to: Control Panel \f2\u8594? Network and Sharing Center \u8594? Change adapter settings\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b\f0 Select Network Adapter:\b0\f4\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\f3\lang1033 Right-click the correct adapter \f2\u8594? Properties\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b\f0 Configure IPv4 Settings:\b0\f4\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\f3\lang1033 Select Internet Protocol Version 4 (TCP/IPv4) \f2\u8594? Properties\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}\f4\lang1033 Choose Use the following IP address:\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Enter IP Address (e.g., 192.168.1.10)\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Enter Subnet Mask (e.g., 255.255.255.0)\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Enter Default Gateway (e.g., 192.168.1.1)\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Choose Use the following DNS server addresses:\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Preferred DNS: (e.g., 192.168.1.2 or 8.8.8.8)\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Alternate DNS: optional\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Click OK \f2\u8594? Close \u8594? Restart the adapter.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b\f0 3. After Installation \f4\endash\f1  \f0 In Server Core Mode (No GUI)\b0\f4\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\f3\lang1033  \f4 Check Network Adapters:\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}\f3  \f4 Get-NetAdapter\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}\f3  \f4 Assign Static IP:\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}New-NetIPAddress -InterfaceIndex 12 -IPAddress 192.168.1.10 -PrefixLength 24 -DefaultGateway 192.168.1.1\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}\f3  \f4 Set DNS Server:\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Set-DnsClientServerAddress -InterfaceIndex 12 -ServerAddresses 192.168.1.2\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}\f3  \f4 Verify Configuration:\f3  \f4 ipconfig /all\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Optional \endash  Use sconfig (simpler):\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Type sconfig in the command prompt.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Choose Option 8: Network Settings \f2\u8594? select the adapter \u8594? set static IP, subnet, gateway, DNS.\f0\lang1033\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 20. Explain the process of promoting a Windows Server to a domain controller?\par
\b0 Ans.1. \b Install the Active Directory Domain Services (AD DS) Role\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Open Server Manager \f2\u8594?\f1  \f0 Manage \f2\u8594?\f1  \f0 Add Roles and Features.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Select Role-based installation \f2\u8594?\f1  \f0 choose the local server.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Check Active Directory Domain Services (AD DS).\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Add required features \f2\u8594?\f1  \f0 Next \f2\u8594?\f1  \f0 Install.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 2. Launch the AD DS Configuration Wizard\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj After installation, click the notification flag in Server Manager.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Select Promote this server to a domain controller.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 3. Choose Deployment Type\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Options available:\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Add a domain controller to an existing domain\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Add a new domain to an existing forest\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Add a new forest (if setting up the first DC)\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}For a brand-new domain, choose Add a new forest and provide a root domain name (e.g., example.local).\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 4. Configure Domain Controller Options\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b0 Choose Forest Functional Level and Domain Functional Level (default: Windows Server 2016).\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Select:\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Domain Name System (DNS) server (optional but recommended).\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Global Catalog (GC) (default, required for the first DC).\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Set a Directory Services Restore Mode (DSRM) password (for recovery).\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 5. Specify Additional Options\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Configure DNS delegation if required (ignore if it\f4\rquote\f0 s the first DC).\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Click Next.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 6. Specify Paths\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Define locations for:\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Database folder\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Log files folder\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}SYSVOL folder\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}(Defaults are usually fine: C:\\Windows\\NTDS).\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 7. Review and Run Prerequisite Check\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Review your configuration.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Run the prerequisite check \f2\u8594?\f1  \f0 ensure there are no critical errors.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Click Install.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 8. Server Reboots\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj The server automatically reboots after promotion.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Once restarted, it becomes a Domain Controller.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 9. Post-Installation Verification\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Log in with domain credentials (domain\\Administrator).\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Verify in Server Manager \f2\u8594?\f1  \f0 Tools:\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Active Directory Users and Computers (ADUC)\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}DNS Manager\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Ensure AD DS and DNS services are running.\lang1033\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 21. Discuss the steps involved in upgrading from a previous version of Windows Server to Windows Server 2016?\par
\b0 Ans. Steps to Upgrade to Windows Server 2016\par
\b 1. Verify Upgrade Path\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Supported in-place upgrades:\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Windows Server 2012 \f2\u8594?\f0  Windows Server 2016\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Windows Server 2012 R2 \f2\u8594?\f0  Windows Server 2016\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}You cannot upgrade directly from Windows Server 2008/R2 or older. Those require migration or a step-up upgrade.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 2. Prepare for Upgrade\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Check system requirements: CPU, RAM, storage (minimum 32 GB).\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Update the existing server with latest patches and service packs.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Check application/role compatibility (some roles may need reinstallation).\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Backup the server (system state + data).\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Disable or temporarily remove third-party antivirus/security software.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 3. Insert Installation Media\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Insert the Windows Server 2016 DVD/USB or mount the ISO.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Run setup.exe from the media.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 4. Start Installation Wizard\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Choose Download updates, drivers, and optional features (recommended).\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Enter product key.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Select the correct edition (Standard/Datacenter, Core/Desktop Experience).\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 5. Choose Upgrade Option\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj When prompted, select:\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Keep personal files and apps (this performs the in-place upgrade).\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}If you select "Nothing," it will be a clean install (not upgrade).\b\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj 6. Accept License Terms\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b0 Read and accept Microsoft Software License Terms.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 7. Compatibility Check\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Setup runs a check for application and driver compatibility.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Fix any issues reported (e.g., uninstall unsupported apps).\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 8. Install Upgrade\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Click Install.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}The upgrade process copies files, installs features, and migrates roles.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Server reboots multiple times.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 9. Post-Upgrade Configuration\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b0 Log in with the same credentials.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Verify that roles (AD DS, DNS, DHCP, IIS, etc.) are working.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Reapply group policies, firewall rules, and settings if needed.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Install the latest Windows Updates and drivers for Server 2016.\b\lang1033\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj 22. What is Active Directory Domain Services (AD DS), and what are its key components?\lang1033\par
\b0 Ans. \b Active Directory Domain Services (AD DS)\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b0 A directory service in Windows Server that stores and manages information about users, computers, and resources.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Provides authentication, authorization, and centralized management.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Key Components:\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Domain \f1\endash\f0  Logical group of objects (users, computers, etc.).\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Tree \f1\endash\f0  Collection of domains in a hierarchy.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Forest \f1\endash\f0  Highest-level container with multiple trees.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Organizational Units (OUs) \f1\endash\f0  Containers to organize objects and apply policies.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Objects \f1\endash\f0  Users, groups, computers, printers.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Schema \f1\endash\f0  Rules/definitions of objects and attributes.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Global Catalog \f1\endash\f0  Searchable index of all objects in a forest.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Domain Controllers (DCs) \f1\endash\f0  Servers that store AD DS and handle authentication.\b\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj 23. How do you create a new Active Directory user account in Windows Server ?\par
\b0 Ans. \b Method 1: Using Active Directory Users and Computers (GUI)\par
Open ADUC Tool\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b0 Go to Server Manager \f2\u8594?\f0  Tools \f2\u8594?\f0  Active Directory Users and Computers.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Select OU (Organizational Unit)\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Expand your domain \f2\u8594?\f0  choose the OU where you want to create the user.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Create New User\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Right-click the OU \f2\u8594?\f0  New \f2\u8594?\f0  User.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Enter User Details\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Fill in First name, Last name, User logon name (e.g., jdoe@example.com\lang1033 ). \par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Click Next.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Set Password\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Enter and confirm password.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Choose options:\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}User must change password at next logon (default)\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}User cannot change password\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Password never expires\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Account is disabled\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Finish\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Review details \f2\u8594?\f0  Click Finish.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}The new user appears in AD.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Method 2: Using PowerShell (Quick Way)\par
Run in PowerShell:\par
\b0 New-ADUser -Name "John Doe" -GivenName "John" -Surname "Doe" -SamAccountName jdoe -UserPrincipalName jdoe@example.com -Path "OU=Sales,DC=example,DC=com" -AccountPassword (Read-Host -AsSecureString "Enter Password") -Enabled $true\par
\b 24. Explain the process of creating and managing Group Policy Objects (GPOs) in Windows Server 2016 or 2019?\par
\b0 Ans. What is a GPO?\par
A Group Policy Object (GPO) is a set of rules and configurations applied to users or computers in an Active Directory (AD) environment.\par
Used to enforce security settings, software installations, desktop restrictions, etc.\par
GPOs are linked to sites, domains, or organizational units (OUs).\par
\b Steps to Create and Manage GPOs\b0\par
\b 1. Open Group Policy Management Console (GPMC)\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b0 Go to Server Manager \f2\u8594?\f0  Tools \f2\u8594?\f0  Group Policy Management.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}The GPMC window opens, showing your forest, domains, and OUs.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 2. Create a New GPO\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj In the left pane, expand your domain.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Right-click Group Policy Objects \f2\u8594?\f0  New.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Enter a name for the GPO (e.g., \f2\ldblquote\f0 Password Policy\f2\rdblquote\f0  or \f2\ldblquote\f0 Desktop Restrictions\f2\rdblquote\f0 ).\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}The new GPO now appears under Group Policy Objects.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 3. Edit the GPO\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Right-click the GPO \f2\u8594?\f0  Edit.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}The Group Policy Management Editor opens.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Configure settings under:\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Computer Configuration \f2\u8594?\f0  policies for computers (startup scripts, security, updates).\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}User Configuration \f2\u8594?\f0  policies for users (desktop settings, folder redirection, logon scripts).\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 4. Link the GPO\b0\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\lang1033 1. Decide where to apply the GPO:\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Site\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Domain\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}OU\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\lang1033 2. Right-click the target container (e.g., an OU) \f2\u8594?\f0  Link an Existing GPO.\par
\lang1033 3. Select your GPO \f2\u8594?\f0  OK.\par
\b 5. Apply and Test the GPO\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Run gpupdate /force on a client to refresh policies.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Verify applied policies using:\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj gpresult /r\par
or\par
Get-GPResultantSetOfPolicy -ReportType Html -Path C:\\GPReport.html\par
\b 6. Manage GPOs\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Enable/Disable GPO: \b0 Right-click GPO \f2\u8594?\f0  Enable/Disable.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}\b Enforce GPO\b0 : Prevents lower-level GPOs from overriding it.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}\b Block Inheritance: \b0 Stops higher-level GPOs from applying to an OU.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}\b Backup/Restore GPOs: \b0 Right-click GPO \f2\u8594?\f0  Back Up / Import Settings.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}\b Delegate Control: \b0 Assign permissions for who can edit or link GPOs\b .\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj 25\f3 . \f0 What\f3  \f0 are\f3  \f0 Organizational\f3  \f0 Units\f3  (\f0 OUs\f3 ) \f0 in\f3  \f0 Active\f3  \f0 Directory\f3 , \f0 and\f3  \f0 how\f3  \f0 do\f3  \f0 you\f3  \f0 use them\f3 ?\par
\b0\f0 Ans. What are Organizational Units (OUs)?\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj An Organizational Unit (OU) is a container object in Active Directory used to organize users, groups, computers, and other OUs within a domain.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Think of it like a folder inside AD that helps manage and apply policies in a structured way.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}OUs do not have separate security boundaries (unlike domains) \u8594? they are mainly for organization and administration.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b How are OUs Used?\par
1. Organizing AD Objects\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b0 Group related users, computers, or groups in one OU for easy management.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Example: Create OUs like HR, IT, Sales, or Computers.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 2. Delegating Administration\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj You can assign limited permissions to junior admins or department heads only on a specific OU.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Example: HR team can manage accounts only in the HR OU, not the whole domain.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 3. Applying Group Policies (GPOs)\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj GPOs can be linked to OUs to enforce specific rules/settings.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Example: Apply stricter security policies to the Finance OU but not the Sales OU.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 4. Simplifying Management\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b0 Easier to locate and manage AD objects when structured in OUs.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Supports nesting \u8594? OUs can contain other OUs.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Example: OU = Sales \u8594? Sub-OU = Regional Sales.\b\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj 26. Describe the process of delegating administrative privileges in Active Directory?\par
\b0 Ans. What is Delegation in AD?\par
Delegation in Active Directory means giving specific administrative rights to a user or group so they can manage only certain objects (like users, groups, or computers) within an OU, without giving them full domain admin rights.\par
Example: HR team can reset passwords only for HR employees, but not for IT staff.\par
\b Steps to Delegate Administrative Privileges\par
1. Open Active Directory Users and Computers (ADUC)\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b0 Go to Server Manager \u8594? Tools \u8594? Active Directory Users and Computers.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Expand your domain.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 2. Select the Target OU\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Locate the OU (Organizational Unit) where you want to delegate\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}permissions.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Example: OU = Sales Department.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 3. Start the Delegation Wizard\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Right-click the OU \u8594? Select Delegate Control.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}This opens the Delegation of Control Wizard.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 4. Choose Users or Groups\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Click Add \u8594? select the user(s) or security group(s) you want to delegate rights to.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Example: Add HR_Admins group.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Click Next.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 5. Assign Tasks\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Wizard gives common delegation options, such as:\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Reset user passwords and force password change at next logon\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Create, delete, and manage user accounts\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Modify group membership\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Manage Group Policy links\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}You can also choose Create a custom task to delegate for more granular control.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}Select the desired option(s) \u8594? Click Next.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 6. Finish\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Review your selections \u8594? Click Finish.\par
{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}The selected users/groups now have delegated rights on that OU.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 7. Verify Delegation\par

\pard{\pntext\f7\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf7\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b0 Right-click the OU \u8594? Properties \u8594? Security tab \u8594? check assigned permissions.\b\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b0\f2\par
\par
\b\f0\lang1033\par
\par
}
 