{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\nouicompat\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Calibri;}{\f1\fnil Calibri;}{\f2\fnil\fcharset1 Cambria Math;}{\f3\fnil\fcharset2 Symbol;}}
{\colortbl ;\red0\green0\blue255;}
{\*\generator Riched20 10.0.19041}{\*\mmathPr\mmathFont2\mwrapIndent1440 }\viewkind4\uc1 
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qc\ul\b\f0\fs28\lang9 Module: 13- Networking with Windows Server\par
\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\ulnone 1.Discuss the role of Windows Firewall in Windows Server and how to configure it?\par
\b0 Ans.\b Role of Windows Firewall in Windows Server\par
\b0 Windows Firewall is a built-in security feature in Windows Server that controls incoming and outgoing network traffic. Its main roles are:\par

\pard{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf3\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Traffic Filtering \b0\f1\endash\f0  It allows or blocks network connections based on predefined security rules (IP address, port, protocol, etc.).\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}\b Protects Against Unauthorized Access \b0\f1\endash\f0  Prevents malicious software or users from gaining access to the server.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}\b Policy Enforcement \b0\f1\endash\f0  Supports Group Policy for centralized management across a domain.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}\b Application Control \b0\f1\endash\f0  Allows or blocks specific applications or services from communicating over the network.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}\b Integration with Security \b0\f1\endash\f0  Works with IPSec, VPN, and other security tools to provide a layered defense.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b How to Configure Windows Firewall in Windows Server\par
You can configure Windows Firewall in several ways:\par
\b0 1. Through Graphical User Interface (GUI)\par
\b Step 1: \b0 Open Server Manager \f2\u8594?\f0  Click Tools \f2\u8594?\f0  Select Windows Defender Firewall with Advanced Security.\par
\b Step 2: \b0 In the console, you\rquote ll see:\par

\pard{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf3\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Inbound Rules \b0 (control incoming traffic)\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}\b Outbound Rules \b0 (control outgoing traffic)\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}\b Connection Security Rules \b0 (used with IPSec for authentication)\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Step 3: \b0 To create a new rule:\par

\pard{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf3\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Right-click Inbound Rules \f2\u8594?\f0  Click New Rule.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Choose the rule type (Port, Program, Predefined, or Custom).\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Define conditions (e.g., allow TCP Port 80 for web server).\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Set action: Allow, Block, or Allow if secure.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Name the rule and finish.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Step 4: \b0 Test the firewall rule by trying to connect to the server service.\par
2. Using Command Line (netsh)\par

\pard{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf3\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Open Command Prompt (Admin).\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Example: To allow incoming traffic on port 3389 (Remote Desktop):\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b CMD:\b0 - netsh advfirewall firewall add rule name="Allow RDP" protocol=TCP dir=in localport=3389 action=allow\par
\b 3. Using PowerShell\b0\par
PowerShell is more modern and preferred in automation:\par
Example: Allow HTTP (port 80) traffic:\par
\b CMD:- \b0 New-NetFirewallRule -DisplayName "Allow HTTP" -Direction Inbound -Protocol TCP -LocalPort 80 -Action Allow\par
Example: Block a specific IP:\par
\b CMD:- \b0 New-NetFirewallRule -DisplayName "Block Malicious IP" -Direction Inbound -RemoteAddress 192.168.1.50 -Action Block\par
\b 4. Using Group Policy (For Domain Environments)\par

\pard{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf3\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b0 Open Group Policy Management Console (GPMC) on Domain Controller.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Navigate to: Computer Configuration \f2\u8594?\f0  Policies \f2\u8594?\f0  Windows Settings \f2\u8594?\f0  Security Settings \f2\u8594?\f0  Windows Defender Firewall with Advanced Security\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Configure inbound/outbound rules and apply them to multiple servers at once.\ul\fs22\lang9\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\ulnone\b\fs28 2.What is Network Address Translation (NAT) in Windows Server, and how do you configure it?\par
\b0 Ans. NAT (Network Address Translation) is a networking feature in Windows Server that allows private IP addresses (inside a LAN) to communicate with external networks (like the internet) by mapping them to a public IP address.\par
\b Roles of NAT:\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf3\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Internet Sharing \endash  \b0 Allows multiple internal devices to access the internet using a single public IP.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}\b Security \endash  \b0 Hides internal IP addresses from external networks.\b\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Efficient IP Use \endash  \b0 Saves public IPv4 addresses by using private addressing internally.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}\b Server Publishing \endash  \b0 Allows external users to access internal servers (via Port Forwarding).\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b How to Configure NAT in Windows Server\b0\par
You configure NAT using the Routing and Remote Access Service (RRAS) role.\par
\b Step 1: Install RRAS Role\par

\pard{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf3\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b0 Open Server Manager \f2\u8594?\f0\lang9  Click Manage \f2\u8594?\f0\lang9  Add Roles and Features.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Select Remote Access role.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Under Role Services, select Routing.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Complete installation.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Step 2: Configure RRAS for NAT\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf3\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Open Server Manager \b\f2\u8594?\f0\lang9  \b0 Tools \f2\u8594?\f0\lang9  Routing and Remote Access.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Right-click the server name \b\f2\u8594?\f0\lang9  \b0 Configure and Enable Routing and Remote Access.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}The wizard opens \b\f2\u8594?\f0\lang9  \b0 Select NAT option.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Choose the public interface (the one connected to the internet) \f2\u8594?\f0\lang9  enable NAT on it.\tab\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Choose the private interface (the LAN network).\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Step 3: Verify Configuration\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf3\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj On the NAT-enabled interface, RRAS will translate requests from private IPs (e.g., 192.168.1.10) to the public IP (e.g., 203.0.113.5).\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Clients on the LAN should now be able to access the internet.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Step 4 (Optional): Configure Port Forwarding\par
\b0 If you want external users to access an internal server (like a web server on port 80):\par

\pard{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf3\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj In RRAS console, expand IPv4 \f2\u8594?\f0\lang9  NAT.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Right-click the public interface \f2\u8594?\f0\lang9  Properties \f2\u8594?\f0\lang9  Services and Ports tab.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Add a new service (e.g., TCP port 80 \f2\u8594?\f0\lang9  forward to internal server 192.168.1.20).\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Step 5: Testing\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf3\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj From an internal client (private IP), try browsing the internet.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}For port forwarding, try accessing the public IP from outside; it should redirect to the internal server.\ul\fs22\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\ulnone\b\fs28 3.Explain the concept of Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) and how to configure it in Windows Server 2016.\par
\b0 Ans. DHCP is a network protocol that automatically assigns IP addresses and other network configuration settings (subnet mask, default gateway, DNS, etc.) to client computers in a network.\par
Instead of manually configuring IP addresses, DHCP does it automatically, reducing errors and saving time.\par
\b Key Roles of DHCP\b0\par
\b Automatic IP Assignment \endash  \b0 Assigns IPs from a pool (called a DHCP scope).\par
\b Avoids Conflicts \endash  \b0 Ensures no two devices get the same IP address.\par
\b Centralized Management \endash  \b0 All network settings are managed from the DHCP server.\par
\b Dynamic Updates \endash  \b0 Supports automatic lease renewal and DNS updates.\par
\b How DHCP Works (Process)\par
\b0 The process is called DORA:\par

\pard{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf3\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Discover \b0\endash  Client broadcasts a request for an IP.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}\b Offer\b0  \endash  DHCP server responds with an available IP.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}\b Request \b0\endash  Client requests the offered IP.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}\b Acknowledge \b0\endash  DHCP server confirms and assigns the IP.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b How to Configure DHCP in Windows Server 2016\par
Step 1: Install the DHCP Server Role\par

\pard{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf3\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b0 Open Server Manager \f2\u8594?\f0\lang9  Add Roles and Features.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Select Role-based or feature-based installation.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Choose the server.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}From the roles list, select DHCP Server \f2\u8594?\f0\lang9  Next \f2\u8594?\f0\lang9  Install.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}After installation, click Complete DHCP configuration (for authorization).\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Step 2: Authorize the DHCP Server\par

\pard{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf3\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b0 Only authorized DHCP servers can assign IPs in a domain environment.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}In the wizard, authorize the server with Domain Admin credentials.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Step 3: Configure a DHCP Scope\par
--> \b0 A scope defines the range of IP addresses the server can lease to clients.\par
      1. Open DHCP Management Console (from Tools in Server     Manager).\par
      2. Right-click IPv4 \f2\u8594?\f0\lang9  New Scope.\par
      3. Define:\par

\pard{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf3\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Scope Name \f2\u8594?\f0\lang9  Example: \ldblquote OfficeLAN\rdblquote .\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}IP Range \f2\u8594?\f0\lang9  e.g., 192.168.1.100 \endash  192.168.1.200.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Subnet Mask \f2\u8594?\f0\lang9  e.g., 255.255.255.0.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Exclusions (optional)\f2\u8594?\f0\lang9  IPs reserved for servers (e.g., 192.168.1.150\endash 160).\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Lease Duration \f2\u8594?\f0\lang9  Default is 8 days.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Router (Default Gateway) \f2\u8594?\f0\lang9  e.g., 192.168.1.1.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}DNS Server \f2\u8594?\f0\lang9  Internal or external DNS IP.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}WINS Server (if required, otherwise skip).\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj       4. Activate the scope.\par
\b Step 4: Test DHCP\par

\pard{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf3\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b0 On a client machine \f2\u8594?\f0\lang9  open Command Prompt \f2\u8594?\f0\lang9  run:\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj CMD:-\par
ipconfig /release\par
ipconfig /renew\par

\pard{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf3\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj The client should receive an IP from the DHCP pool\ul\fs22\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\ulnone\b\fs28 4. Describe the process of configuring DNS (Domain Name System) in Windows Server?\b0\par
Ans. DNS (Domain Name System) is a service that translates human-readable domain names (like {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK www.example.com }}{\fldrslt{www.example.com\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs28 ) into IP addresses (like 192.168.1.10) that computers use to communicate.\par
\b In a Windows Server environment, DNS is essential for:\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf3\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Active Directory (AD) (AD requires DNS for locating domain controllers).\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Name resolution for internal and external resources.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Hosting zones for domains and managing records.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Steps to Configure DNS in Windows Server\par
Step 1: Install the DNS Server Role\par

\pard{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf3\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b0 Open Server Manager \f2\u8594?\f0  Click Add Roles and Features.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Choose Role-based or feature-based installation.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Select your server.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}In Server Roles, check DNS Server \f2\u8594?\f0  Next \f2\u8594?\f0  Install.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Once installed, open DNS Manager from Tools in Server Manager.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Step 2: Configure a Forward Lookup Zone\par

\pard{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf3\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b0 A Forward Lookup Zone resolves hostnames \f2\u8594?\f0  IP addresses.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}In DNS Manager, expand the server \f2\u8594?\f0  Right-click Forward Lookup Zones \f2\u8594?\f0  New Zone.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Choose Primary Zone (integrated with AD if using Active Directory).\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Enter the zone name (e.g., mydomain.local).\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Save zone file (default is fine).\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Select Allow both secure and nonsecure dynamic updates (recommended if not strictly AD-based).\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Step 3: Add DNS Records\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf3\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj A Record (Host Record) \f2\u8594?\f0  Maps a hostname to an IP.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}CNAME Record (Alias) \f2\u8594?\f0  Points one hostname to another.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}MX Record \f2\u8594?\f0  Defines mail server.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Step 4: Configure a Reverse Lookup Zone (Optional but Recommended)\b0\par
A Reverse Lookup Zone resolves IP \f2\u8594?\f0  hostname.\par

\pard{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf3\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj In DNS Manager, right-click Reverse Lookup Zones \f2\u8594?\f0  New Zone.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Choose Primary Zone.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Enter network ID (e.g., 192.168.1).\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Finish wizard.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Add PTR Records that map IPs back to hostnames.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Step 5: Configure DNS Forwarders\b0\par
If your DNS server doesn\f1\rquote\f0 t know how to resolve a query (like for internet sites), it can forward requests to external DNS servers (like Google 8.8.8.8).\par

\pard{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf3\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj In DNS Manager \f2\u8594?\f0  Right-click the server \f2\u8594?\f0  Properties.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Go to Forwarders tab \f2\u8594?\f0  Add IPs of external DNS servers.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Step 6: Testing DNS\b0\par
On a client machine, set the Preferred DNS Server to your Windows Server\f1\rquote\f0 s IP.\par
Run: cmd.\par
nslookup server1.mydomain.local\par
If configured correctly, it should return the IP address\par
\b 5. What is Server Manager, and how do you use it to manage servers in Windows Server?\par
\b0 Ans. Server Manager is a built-in management tool in Windows Server (2012, 2016, 2019, 2022) that provides a centralized console for managing local and remote servers.\par
\b It\rquote s mainly used for:\par

\pard{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf3\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b0 Installing and managing roles and features.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Monitoring server performance and health.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Configuring server settings.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Managing multiple servers from a single console.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Key Features of Server Manager\par

\pard{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf3\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b0 Dashboard \endash  Overview of roles, features, and server status.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Role & Feature Management \endash  Install/uninstall roles like DNS, DHCP, AD DS, IIS.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Remote Management \endash  Manage multiple servers in the same console.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Server Groups \endash  Organize servers by role, location, or function.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Event Monitoring \endash  View alerts, performance issues, and events.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Performance & Services Control \endash  Start/stop services, check resource usage.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b How to Use Server Manager\b0\par
\b 1. Open Server Manager\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf3\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj It launches automatically after logging into Windows Server.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Or open it manually: Start \f2\u8594?\f0  Server Manager.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 2. Add Servers for Management\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf3\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Click Manage \f2\u8594?\f0  Add Servers.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}You can add by:\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Active Directory (search servers in the domain).\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}DNS (search by hostname/IP).\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Import from a text file.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Once added, you can manage them remotely.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 3. Install Roles and Features\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf3\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Go to Manage \f2\u8594?\f0  Add Roles and Features.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Use the wizard to:\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Choose Role-based installation.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Select the target server (local or remote).\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Pick roles (e.g., DNS, DHCP, IIS, AD DS).\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Install features like .NET Framework, Failover Clustering.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}After installation, configuration tools appear under Tools menu.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 4. Monitor Server Health\par

\pard{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf3\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b0 Dashboard shows role health and performance alerts.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}All Servers section lets you view CPU, memory, disk usage, and network activity.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Check Events and Services for warnings or failures.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 5. Create and Manage Server Groups\par

\pard{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf3\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b0 Click Manage \f2\u8594?\f0  Create Server Group.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Group servers by function (e.g., \ldblquote Web Servers\rdblquote  or \ldblquote Domain Controllers\rdblquote ).\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Useful for managing large environments.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 6. Manage Services and Roles\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf3\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Under each server, you can:\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Start/stop/restart services.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Configure role-specific settings (like DHCP scopes, DNS zones, IIS sites).\ul\b\fs22\lang9\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\ulnone\fs28 6. Discuss the role of Remote Desktop Services (RDS) in Windows Server 2016 or 2019 and how to configure it?\par
\b0 Ans. Remote Desktop Services (RDS) in Windows Server 2016/2019 allows users to remotely connect to a server and run applications, desktops, or full virtual environments as if they were local.\par
\b Key Roles of RDS\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf3\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Centralized Application Hosting \b0\endash  Run apps on the server, users access them remotely.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}\b Remote Desktop Access \b0\endash  Users connect to a virtual desktop from anywhere.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}\b Cost-Effective \b0\endash  Reduces need for high-performance hardware on client machines.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}\b Security & Control \b0\endash  IT admins can manage apps, updates, and policies centrally.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}\b Supports BYOD (Bring Your Own Device) \b0\endash  Users can connect from PCs, thin clients, or mobile devices.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b RDS Components\par

\pard{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf3\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj RD Session Host (RDSH): \b0 Hosts Windows-based applications or full desktops for remote users.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}\b RD Connection Broker: \b0 Manages user sessions, load balancing, and reconnects users to existing sessions.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}\b RD Web Access: \b0 Provides access to applications or desktops through a web portal.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}\b RD Gateway: \b0 Enables secure remote connections over the internet using HTTPS.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}\b RD Licensing: \b0 Manages Remote Desktop CALs (Client Access Licenses).\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b How to Configure RDS in Windows Server 2016/2019\b0\par
\b Step 1: Install Remote Desktop Services Role\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf3\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Open Server Manager \f2\u8594?\f0  Manage \f2\u8594?\f0  Add Roles and Features.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Select Role-based or feature-based installation.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Choose the target server.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}From the roles list, select Remote Desktop Services \f2\u8594?\f0  Add features.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Select RDS role services you want (e.g., RD Session Host, RD Licensing, RD Web Access).\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Complete installation.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Step 2: Configure RD Session Host\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf3\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj In Server Manager, go to Remote Desktop Services.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Deploy Session-based Desktop Deployment (for desktops) or Virtual machine-based deployment (for VDI).\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Assign roles to servers (if you have multiple servers, e.g., one for RD Connection Broker, one for Session Host).\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Step 3: Configure Licensing\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf3\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Open Server Manager \f2\u8594?\f0  Remote Desktop Services \f2\u8594?\f0  Overview.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Click on RD Licensing \f2\u8594?\f0  Add your license server.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Activate the license server via RD Licensing Manager.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Install CALs (User CAL or Device CAL, depending on your licensing model).\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Step 4: Configure RD Gateway (Optional \f2\endash\f0  for internet access)\par

\pard{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf3\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b0 Install RD Gateway role service.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Configure certificates for secure HTTPS connections.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Allow users to connect securely over the internet.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Step 5: Publish Applications or Desktops\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf3\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj In Server Manager, go to Remote Desktop Services \f2\u8594?\f0  Collections.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Create a new Session Collection.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Add apps or full desktop sessions that users can access.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Step 6: Provide Access to Users\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf3\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Users can connect via:\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Remote Desktop Client (mstsc.exe) \f2\u8594?\f0  enter server\f2\rquote\f0 s IP or FQDN.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}RD Web Access portal \f2\u8594?\f0  login via browser.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Remote Desktop App on Windows, macOS, iOS, Android.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b Step 7: Test Connection\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf3\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj On a client PC, open Remote Desktop Connection (mstsc).\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}Enter server IP/hostname \f2\u8594?\f0  Login with domain credentials.\par
{\pntext\f3\'B7\tab}User should see either a remote desktop or published apps depending on configuration.\ul\b\fs22\lang9\par
}
 