{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\nouicompat\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Calibri;}{\f1\fnil\fcharset2 Symbol;}}
{\*\generator Riched20 10.0.19041}\viewkind4\uc1 
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qc\b\f0\fs36\lang9 Module: 14- Identity with Windows Server\fs28\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj 1. Explain the process of installing and configuring Hyper-V virtualization in Windows Server 2016.\par
Ans. Installing and Configuring Hyper-V in Windows Server 2016\b0\par
\b 1.Install the Hyper-V role\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf1\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Open Server Manager.\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}Select Add Roles and Features.\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}Choose Role-based installation.\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}Select the server.\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}Check Hyper-V.\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}Add required features and proceed.\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}Restart the server.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 2. Configure Networking\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf1\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj In Hyper-V Manager, create a Virtual Switch (External, Internal, Private).\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}Bind it to a physical NIC for VM connectivity.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 3. Configure Storage\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf1\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Choose folders for storing VM files, VHDs, and snapshots.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 4. Create and Configure VMs\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf1\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj New VM.\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}Assign CPU, RAM, VHD type, ISO file.\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}Install OS, configure integration services.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 2. How do you monitor server performance and manage event logs in Windows Server?\par
Ans. Monitoring Server Performance & Managing Event Logs\par
1. Performance Monitoring\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf1\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Use Task Manager, Resource Monitor, and Performance Monitor (PerfMon).\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}Track counters like CPU %, Memory usage, Disk queue length, Network throughput.\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}Create Data Collector Sets for long-term monitoring.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 2. Event Logs\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf1\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Open Event Viewer.\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}Check System, Application, Security, Directory Services, DNS, and Hyper-V logs.\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}Filter logs, create custom views, and enable log forwarding to a central server.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 3. Describe the different types of storage options available in Windows Server.\par
Ans. Storage Options in Windows Server\par
1. Basic Storage\par

\pard{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf1\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b0 Local disks, partitions, volumes.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 2. Storage Spaces\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf1\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Pools of physical disks.\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}Types: Simple, Mirror, Parity.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 3. SAN (Storage Area Network)\par

\pard{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf1\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b0 iSCSI or Fibre Channel based external storage.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 4. NAS (Network Attached Storage)\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf1\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj File sharing over network.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 5. ReFS (Resilient File System)\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf1\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Corruption-resistant file system.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 6. Clustered Storage\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf1\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Storage for Failover Clusters.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 4. What is the role of File Server in Windows Server, and how do you configure it?\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Ans. Role of File Server & Configuration\par
1. Role\par

\pard{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf1\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b0 Provides file sharing over network.\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}Central storage for users and applications.\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}Controls permissions, quotas, and access policies.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Configuration\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj 1. Install File and Storage Services role.\par
2. Create a Shared Folder.\par
3. Set NTFS permissions and Share permissions.\par
4. Enable features like:\par

\pard{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf1\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj File Server Resource Manager (FSRM)\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}Shadow Copies\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}Access-based Enumeration\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}Quotas\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 5. Explain the process of implementing and managing Distributed File System (DFS) in Windows Server 2016.\par
Ans. Implementing and Managing DFS (Distributed File System)\par
DFS Components\par
\b0 1. DFS Namespace (DFS-N): Creates a unified folder structure.\par
2. DFS Replication (DFS-R): Replicates folders between servers.\par
\b Steps:\b0\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj 1. Install DFS Namespaces and DFS Replication.\par
2. Create a DFS Namespace:\par

\pard{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf1\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Stand-alone or Domain-based.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj 3. Add Folder Targets (real shared folders).\par
4. Configure DFS Replication Group:\par

\pard{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf1\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Add member servers.\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}Choose replication topology (Hub/Spoke, Full mesh).\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}Set schedules and bandwidth.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 6. Discuss the built-in backup and recovery options available in Windows Server 2016 or 2019.\par
Ans. Built-in Backup & Recovery Options (Server 2016/2019)\par

\pard{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf1\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b0 Windows Server Backup\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}System State Backup\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}Bare-metal Recovery\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}Volume Shadow Copy Service (VSS)\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}Recovery Environment (WinRE)\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}Hyper-V VM backups\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}Backup to local disk, network share, or external disk\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 7. How do you configure Windows Server Backup to back up critical data?\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Ans. Configuring Windows Server Backup\par
\b0 1. Install Windows Server Backup.\par
2. Open it and choose Backup Schedule or One-time Backup.\par
3. Select Full Server, Custom, or System State.\par
4. Choose storage location:\par

\pard{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf1\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Local disk\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}External drive\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}Network share\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj 5. Set schedule, confirmation, and finish.\par
\b 8. Explain the steps for restoring files and folders using Windows Server Backup.\par
Ans. Restoring Files/Folders with Windows Server Backup\par
\b0 1. Open Windows Server Backup.\par
2. Select Recover.\par
3. Choose backup location.\par
4. Select Files and Folders recovery.\par
5. Browse to items.\par
6. Restore:\par

\pard{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf1\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj To original location, or\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}Alternate location.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj 7.Confirm and complete.\par
\b 9. What are some common troubleshooting techniques for Windows Server startup issues?\par
Ans. Common Troubleshooting for Startup Issues\par
\b0 1. Check Safe Mode (F8).\par
2. Use Last Known Good Configuration.\par
3. Repair boot files with:\par

\pard{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf1\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj bootrec /fixmbr\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}bootrec /fixboot\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}bootrec /rebuildbcd\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj 4. Check faulty drivers or services.\par
5. Inspect Event Viewer after boot.\par
6. Disconnect external hardware.\par
7. Check system disk health.\par
\b 10. How do you troubleshoot network connectivity problems in Windows Server?\par
Ans. Troubleshooting Network Connectivity Issues\par
\b0 1. Verify NIC status in Network and Sharing Center.\par
2. Use commands:\par

\pard{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf1\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj ipconfig /all\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}ping\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}tracert\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}nslookup\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj 3. Check DNS settings.\par
4. Validate default gateway.\par
5. Restart network services:\par

\pard{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf1\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj net stop dnscache\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}net start dnscache\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj 6. Disable/enable NIC.\par
7. Review firewall settings.\par
8. Check switch/port connectivity.\b\par
11. Discuss common Active Directory-related issues and their troubleshooting steps.\par
Ans. Common Active Directory Issues & Fixes\par
1. Replication issues\par

\pard{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf1\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b0 repadmin /replsummary\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}Fix DNS misconfigurations.\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}Check SYSVOL health.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 2. DNS issues\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf1\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Ensure AD DNS zones exist.\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}Fix forwarders.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 3. Account lockouts\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf1\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Use Account Lockout tools.\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}Check mapped drives and apps holding old passwords.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 4. Group Policy not applying\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf1\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj gpupdate /force\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}gpresult /h report.html\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}Fix permissions or replication.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 5. Time sync issues\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf1\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Ensure DC syncs with external NTP.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj\b 12. Explain how to troubleshoot performance problems on Windows Server 2016 or 2019.\par
Ans. Troubleshooting Performance Problems (2016/2019)\par
\b0 1. Identify resource bottlenecks: CPU, RAM, Disk, Network.\par
2. Use:\par

\pard{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf1\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Task Manager\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}Resource Monitor\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}Performance Monitor\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj 3. Check Windows Logs for errors.\par
4. Inspect services, scheduled tasks, and startups.\par
5. Check for disk fragmentation (HDD).\par
6. Monitor disk queue length.\par
7. Examine network throughput.\par
8. Check memory leaks in applications.\par
9. Update drivers and Windows patches.\par
10.Use Process Explorer for deep analysis\par
}
 